blog: what is the 10101 coordinator (#85)
get10101/10101.github.io: blog/2024-04-19-what-is-the-10101-coordinator.md

---

> slug: what is the 10101 coordinator

Reviewer: Nit: let's use `-` between, otherwise we have spaces in the URL.
```suggestion
slug: what-is-the-10101-coordinator
```

title: What is the 10101 coordinator?
authors: [richard]

> tags: [DLC-Channels]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [DLC-Channels, Coordinator]
```

---

![](../static//2024-04-19-what-is-the-10101-coordinator/coordinator.png)

> 10101 aims to bring self-custodial p2p perpetual futures trading to users without sacrificing UX. Centralized exchanges are easy as they only have to keep a book updating all events on their own system. But 10101 is decentralized. Every user is running their own trading service through the 10101 app or dlc connect web app.

Reviewer: > But 10101 is decentralized

I'm always careful with calling us _decentralized_. Do you think this is correct given that the coordinator is a centralized entity?

Author: The current operational model is not decentralized, but the architecture would definitely allow for it. I can change it.

I tried to argue from a point of view that the vision (idea) of 10101 is decentralized as the coordinator can be replaced with any other coordinator service provider - or 10101 nodes could even interact with each other directly.

I think in that sense we are as decentralized as any self-custodial lightning wallet using a LSP.

Author: After thinking about it, I think the better term here is `distributed`

Reviewer: I like distributed!

In order to compete with the simplicity of central exchange 10101 had to address the following challenges which are easy to solve on central exchanges, but harder to solve in a decentralized p2p trading solution.

1. **Discovery**: Matching traders on opposite sides of a trade.

> 1. **Control**: A trader remains in control to decide when his position is closed.

Reviewer: `sovereignty` sounds sexier :) 
```suggestion
1. **Sovereignty**: Traders remains in control to decide when to close their position.
```

> 1. **Speed**: A trade needs to be executed almost instantly.

Reviewer: Not sure if we can come up with better terminology 
```suggestion
1. **Speed**: A trade needs to be executed almost instantly.
1. **Free Option Problem**: Avoiding the "free option problem" which gives on trader an unfair advantage.
```

At 10101 trades are setup between equal parties. A trade can only be setup if both nodes agree to the contract (discreet log contract). The 10101 coordinator simplifies that discovery by being the only node the users have to connect to. Through the coordinator any 10101 trader can discover another 10101 trader.

### Control

When submitting an order the coordinator will look for one or several matching counterparties. Once found the coordinator initiates the dlc protocol with each party. That means your direct counterparty will always be the 10101 coordinator, but implicitely whoever the coordinator matched you up with.

For executing order all parties had to be online to exchange the required messages to establish a dlc. But once this is setup any 10101 Trader can independtly control their position, without having to rely on their indirect counterparty to be online.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Free Option Problem

The free option problem allows a trader to delay or back out of a trade after both users have collateralized it. He would do so based on whether the exchange rate has moved for or against their favor since the time that the terms were set.

Because DLC protocols are synchronous, one trader must be the first to sign all corresponding transactions. Trader 2 should do the same afterwards. This stepwise process gives the second user the unique ability to delay the trade while monitoring the prevailing exchange rate. If the rate has moved in their favor since the time that the terms were set (prevailing rate is now worse than the agreed-upon rate), then we should expect them to complete the swap. Conversely, if it has moved against them, it is in their best interest to let the swap expire, take their refund, and begin the process again.

This is called the **Free Option Problem**.

Centralized exchanges do not face this problem because the platform ensures safe execution. 

Similar in 10101 - the coordinator connects two traders with each other holding back both signatures until al signatures are available. This way, we solved the free option problem. 

```

#### Simple example

1. Alice wants to go $500 long and Bob wants to go $500 short. Both submit an order to the coordinator.
1. The coordinator matches Alice with Bob and iniates the dlc protocol.
1. The coordiantor establishes a dlc with Alice acting as the counterparty going $500 short.
1. The coordinator establishes a dlc with Bob acting as the counterparty going $500 long.

Assume Bob wants to close his position.

1. Bob submits a closing order going $500 long.
1. The coordinator will look for a matching order going $500 short.

> 1. If a match can be found (doesn't have to be Alice) the coordinator executes the same procedure as before with Alice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If a match can be found (doesn't have to be Alice) the coordinator executes the same procedure as before with Alice but this time with a new party.
```

> 1. If no match can be found. The order will get rejected or remain open until a match has been found.

Reviewer: An order should never get rejected. 

```suggestion
1. If no match can be found. The order will remain open until a match has been found.
```

Two key take aways from that simple example:

- The coordinator provides a service to the traders to trade whenever they want. Giving them control over their position without impacting the original counterparty.
- Your position remains open until it either expires, get liquidated or the trader closes the position. If your originally matched counterparty decides to close their position, the coordinator will look for a replacement without you even noticing.

### Speed

The bitcoin price moves fast and so must the trade. In a central exchange a trade is merely a database update. It can't really get faster than that, but with dlc channels we can get very close to it.

At 10101 your first trade will open a dlc channel. A multi-sig transaction that locks up your and your counterparties (coordinators) trading balance on-chain. This first transaction (funding tx) can take some time depending on the fee environment. But once confirmed any consecutive trade is nearly instant.

> The hub and spoke design pattern of 10101 allows to optimize the generation of these dlc channels and thus minimizes the corresponding on-chain costs. Assume in the diagram provided above, every 10101 Trader would open a direct dlc channel with each other 10101 Trader. That would result in 30 (n \* n-1 | n=6) channels. With the 10101 coordinator in the middle we only need 6 (n | n=6) channels.

Reviewer: We should add an additional paragraph about **Capital efficiency** as  in the extreme example the overal capital is spread among 30 channels, while in the 1-coordinator example, all capital can efficiently be used.

_Note, its absolutely possible that two 10101 nodes can open a dlc channel with each other and trade independently from the 10101 coordinator. This makes sense if two trades want to trade bigger volumes and generally only want to go the opposite direction._

### Get Involved

- **Try Our Platform:** Experience the future of Bitcoin trading today by downloading the 10101 app. Available for Android and iOS, you can start exploring all our features in the current beta version. Visit [our website](https://10101.finance/)[^website] for direct links to download the app.

> - **Stay Informed:** Keep up with our progress and updates by signing up for our newsletter. You’ll receive firsthand information on feature releases, upgrades, and insights directly from our team.

Reviewer: We have a newsletter? 😅

Author: That part I've copied from your PR 😂

Author: ![Screenshot 2024-04-22 at 10 12 44](https://github.com/get10101/10101.github.io/assets/382048/0b3a8ab6-0384-427a-9958-0ecdd5cde966)

Reviewer: 🫣
